---
layout: post
title: Open
tags: oss
categories: blog
author: Tamas Nagy
---

The Open Source Software (OSS) approach can be loosely defined as the
public release of source code to be freely viewed, modified, and
redistributed under a given license. This short essay
explores various aspects of the OSS model, touches on some common
misconceptions, and considers some of its shortcomings.

It is easy to draw parallels between OSS and scientific research because the
scientific method is, intrinsically, an open source process. Science is
built on replication and peer-review; therefore, it is requisite that 
the methodology be made available for scrutiny. Since there are
thousands of researchers working on all of its facets, science progresses
at a rapid pace with a high level of accuracy and innovativeness. It is the sharing of
ideas, work, and results that allows the whole process to function. 
In the same manner as scientific theories, software will become more robust if more people 
look at it, tinker with it, and break it.

It is not, however, a basic science. Open Source produces a tangible
result---the software---in addition to its intellectual contributions.
Thus it is most analogous to the applied biomedical and chemical fields where
the goal is to produce an end product. Thus, unsurprisingly, commercial interests
(especially IBM, Novell, etc.) are heavily involved in OSS, as they are with 
the other aforementioned applied fields.

Despite the similarities, OSS is fundamentally unique among the applied sciences in that the actual 
duplication and implementation cost is trivial. The code can be copied and
inserted easily into an ongoing project with minimal effort. Additionally, 
software is unique in that widespread usage is generally advantageous (e.g. Apache) because
that leads to more users uncovering bugs and submitting patches, which then contributes to the
further propagation of the software. 

Promoting usage is not the only motivation for choosing the open source
development model. A project may be open sourced for a variety of reasons, but
altruism is generally fairly low on the list. A common misconception is that, because 
the end product is given away for free, OSS developers will not be compensated for their work.
The same could be said of other scientific research because the knowledge
is being given without any expectation of direct repayment. This view avoids 
the importance of resume and reputation building. Showing a potential employer real,
useful examples of one's work is a large bonus; it shows enjoyment of coding and 
the possession of applicable programming knowledge. Additionally, one may get recommendations 
from within in the OSS community based on one's work.

The aforementioned independent developers are predominant 
on small, specific projects, but paid OSS developers are now the principal
contributors to most large OSS projects like Linux. Corporations often have 
several full-time software engineers working on various OSS projects. Their reasons for doing so can be 
placed into three distinct categories: (1) the company sells hardware 
that runs the target OSS project like Intel or IBM, (2) the company sells
services that run or use the OSS project like Microsoft's Azure, or (3)
the company provides paid support for the OSS project, e.g. Novell or Red
Hat. Richard Stallman may think that the association with industry is an
inherent negative, but the current situation is a quantum improvement
over the homogeneous closed-development models of the past.

Security is often other reason for choosing open source, albeit one that
is perhaps slightly counterintuitive and hotly debated. Open-sourced 
cryptosystems have to, by definition, satisfy [Kerckhoffs's principle](http://www.cs.tufts.edu/comp/165/classpages/Intro/Kerckhoffs.html), which
inherently makes them more robust than closed-sourced ones. That is, open sourced
cryptosystems have to designed in such a way that they are secure even if everything about the
system, except the private key itself, is publicly available. Pretty Good Privacy 
(PGP) is one such example; it is considered a military-grade cryptosystem 
and is completely open-sourced. Additionally, open-sourced cryptosystems
build trust, because users know that there are no secret backdoors or
glaring vulnerabilities. Cryptography systems designed with OSS in mind are
immune to reverse engineering, contrasting with many "Security through
obscurity" techniques. However, simply making the source available will
not guarantee better security, as the recent Cryptocat [debacle](http://arstechnica.com/security/2013/07/bad-kitty-rooky-mistake-in-cryptocat-chat-app-makes-cracking-a-snap/) showed.

Rookie mistakes, like those committed by the Cryptocat developers, are only a
subset of the limitations of open source:

> Open source does work, but it is most definitely not a panacea. Software is hard. The issues aren't that simple. 
> 
> \- [Jamie Zawinski](http://www.jwz.org/gruntle/nomo.html)

It suffers from many of the same difficulties that beset academia:
the clashing of strong personalities working on the same project, lack of
focus/direction (especially [forking](https://help.github.com/articles/fork-a-repo)),
focus on power users, among other things. That being said, open source is
oft superior to closed-source solutions. It is with good reason that most
supercomputers and mission-critical appliances run OSS. It is not a magic
bullet and it will not lead to a free software "utopia." It is software
development that mirrors applied scientific research that offers a real
solution to many real problems.
